modifying core-concepts and adding feature: projects (#2301)
dlt-hub/dlt: docs/website/docs/plus/core-concepts/cache.md

> # Local Transformation Cache

Reviewer: cache is experimental at the moment.

Author: Added a note for this

In dlt+ you have the option of executing your data transformations inside a temporary storage created by dlt+ ("dlt+ Cache") in your local system. 

## How it works

> You specify which datasets you want to pass to the cache in your dlt manifest file (`dlt.yml`). The cache automatically discovers the source schema from the data and runs your transformations using the cache and duckdb as a query engine. Currently you can define your transformations in dbt or Python (pands, arrows, polars, etc.). After running your transformations, the cache will sync the results to the output dataset in your destination. Output schema is also automatically discovered (when not explicitly declared).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The dlt+ Cache is a powerful tool that enables users to shift parts of their data workflows earlier in the development process. Its primary use case today is running transformations locally, but we plan to support more use cases and workflows in the future.

You specify which datasets you want to pass to the cache in your dlt manifest file (`dlt.yml`). The cache automatically discovers the source schema from the data and runs your transformations using the cache and duckdb as a query engine. Currently you can define your transformations in dbt or Python (pands, arrows, polars, etc.). After running your transformations, the cache will sync the results to the output dataset in your destination. Output schema is also automatically discovered (when not explicitly declared).
```

## Why you should use it

Using local cache for transformations provides several advantages, like:

> 1. your source schema is discovered automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Your source schema is discovered automatically.
```

> 2. you save unnecessary compute costs by having all your transformations done locally. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. You save unnecessary computing costs by shifting transformation queries away from expensive cloud warehouses to the local machine or a cloud-deployed server.
```

> 3. there are no egress costs since your data remains in your local system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. You reduce the egress costs since data remains in your local system.
```

> 4. the same engine is used for transformations (i.e., SQL dialect) irrespective of where you're loading your data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. The same engine is used for transformations (i.e., SQL dialect) irrespective of where you're loading your data.
```

> 5. there is support for pythonic transformations (Hamilton/Kedro), dbt, sqlmesh, and sdf.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Let's remove this while we're not sure we want to release Pythonic transformations yet

> 6. metadata is easily propagated from the input to the output dataset and dataset catalogs are manitained automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Metadata is easily propagated from the input to the output dataset and dataset catalogs are maintained automatically.
```

---
title: "🧪 Cache"
description: Execute data transformations in your local cache
keywords: ["dlt+", "cache", "transformations"]
---
:::note
🚧 This feature is under development. Interested in becoming an early tester? [Join dlt+ early access](https://info.dlthub.com/waiting-list)
:::
The dlt+ Cache is a temporary local storage created by dlt+ to enhance development workflows. It allows you to efficiently run local transformations, materialize dbt models, and test your queries before deploying them to production. 

## How it works

> The dlt+ Cache is a powerful tool that enables users to shift parts of their data workflows earlier in the development process. Its primary use case today is running transformations locally, but we plan to support more use cases and workflows in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The dlt+ Cache is a powerful tool that enables users to shift parts of their data workflows earlier in the development process. Its primary use case today is [running transformations locally](../features/transformations/index.md), but we plan to support more use cases and workflows in the future.
```
